THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
PREAMBLE
WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly resolved to constitute 
India into a 
1[SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR DEMOCRATIC 
REPUBLIC] and to secure to all its citizens:
JUSTICE, social, economic and political;
 
LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship;
EQUALITY of status and of opportunity;
and to promote among them all
FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the 2[unity 
and integrity of the Nation];
IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this twenty-sixth day of 
November, 1949, do HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO 
OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s.2, for "SOVEREIGN 
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC" (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for "Unity of the Nation" (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
25
1[PART  IVA
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES 
51A. Fundamental duties.—It shall be the duty of every citizen of 
India—
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and 
institutions, the National Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our 
national struggle for freedom; 
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of 
India;
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called 
upon to do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood 
amongst all the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and 
regional or sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the 
dignity of women;
(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite 
culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including 
forests, lakes, rivers and wild life, and to have compassion for living 
creatures; 
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of
THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IV.— Directive Principles of State Policy)
22
1[(f) that children are given opportunities and facilities to develop 
in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity and that 
childhood and youth are protected against exploitation and against moral 
and material abandonment.]
2[39A. Equal justice and free legal aid.—The State shall secure that the 
operation of the legal system promotes justice, on a basis of equal opportunity, 
and shall, in particular, provide free legal aid, by suitable legislation or schemes 
or in any other way, to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not 
denied to any citizen by reason of economic or other disabilities.] 
40. Organisation of village panchayats.—The State shall take steps to 
organise village panchayats and endow them with such powers and authority as 
may be necessary to enable them to function as units of self-government.
THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
17
(e) the extinguishment or modification of any rights accruing by 
virtue of any agreement, lease or licence for the purpose of searching for, 
or winning, any mineral or mineral oil, or the premature termination or 
cancellation of any such agreement, lease or licence,
shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconsistent with, or takes 
away or abridges any of the rights conferred by 1[article 14 or article 19]:
Provided that where such law is a law made by the Legislature of a State, 
the provisions of this article shall not apply thereto unless such law, having 
been reserved for the consideration of the President, has received his assent:]
2[Provided further that where any law makes any provision for the 
acquisition by the State of any estate and where any land comprised therein is 
held by a person under his personal cultivation, it shall not be lawful for the
forests and wild life.
49.
Protection of monuments and places and objects of national 
importance.
50.
Separation of judiciary from executive.
51.
Promotion of international peace and security.
PART IVA
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES 
51A.
Fundamental duties.
PART V
THE UNION
CHAPTER I.
THE EXECUTIVE
The President and Vice-President
52. 
The President of India.
53.
Executive power of the Union.
54. 
Election of President.
THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits) 
168
(b) all rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of the 
Dominion of India and of the Government of each Governor's Province, 
whether arising out of any contract or otherwise, shall be the rights, 
liabilities and obligations respectively of the Government of India and 
the Government of each corresponding State,
subject to any adjustment made or to be made by reason of the creation before 
the commencement of this Constitution of the Dominion of Pakistan or of the 
Provinces of West Bengal, East Bengal, West Punjab and East Punjab.
295. Succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations 
in other cases.—(1) As from the commencement of this Constitution—
(a) all property and assets which immediately before such 
commencement were vested in any Indian State corresponding to a State 
specified in Part B of the First Schedule shall vest in the Union, if the
THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
10
(e) to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India; 1[and]
2[(f)*                      *                      *                    *                     *] 
(g) to practise any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or 
business. 
3[(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the operation of 
any existing law, or prevent the State from making any law, in so far as such 
law imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the 
said sub-clause in the interests of 4[the sovereignty and integrity of India], the 
security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, 
decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or 
incitement to an offence.]
(3) Nothing in sub-clause (b) of the said clause shall affect the operation 
of any existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent the State from making
THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
15
(b) to manage its own affairs in matters of religion;
(c) to own and acquire movable and immovable property; and
(d) to administer such property in accordance with law.
27. Freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular 
religion.—No person shall be compelled to pay any taxes, the proceeds of 
which are specifically appropriated in payment of expenses for the promotion 
or maintenance of any particular religion or religious denomination.
28. Freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious 
worship in certain educational institutions.—(1) No religious instruction 
shall be provided in any educational institution wholly maintained out of State 
funds.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to an educational institution which 
is administered by the State but has been established under any endowment or 
trust which requires that religious instruction shall be imparted in such 
institution.
THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IV.— Directive Principles of State Policy)
24
49. Protection of monuments and places and objects of national 
importance.—It shall be the obligation of the State to protect every monument 
or place or object of artistic or historic interest, 1[declared by or under law 
made by Parliament] to be of national importance, from spoliation, 
disfigurement, destruction, removal, disposal or export, as the case may be.
50. Separation of judiciary from executive.—The State shall take steps 
to separate the judiciary from the executive in the public services of the State.
51. Promotion of international peace and security.—The State shall 
endeavour to—
(a)  promote international peace and security; 
(b)  maintain just and honourable relations between nations;
(c) foster respect for international law and treaty obligations in the 
dealings of organised peoples with one another; and
(d) encourage settlement of international disputes by arbitration.
THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
8
Explanation.—For the purposes of this article and article 16, 
"economically weaker sections" shall be such as may be notified by the State 
from time to time on the basis of family income and other indicators of 
economic disadvantage.]
16. Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment.—(1) 
There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to 
employment or appointment to any office under the State. 
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, 
place of birth, residence or any of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against 
in respect of, any employment or office under the State.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament from making any law 
prescribing, in regard to a class or classes of employment or appointment to an 
office 1[under the Government of, or any local or other authority within, a State